# TSBS Supplemental Guide: ClickHouse

ClickHouse is an open source column-oriented database management system capable of real time generation of analytical data reports using SQL queries. 
This supplemental guide explains how the data generated for TSBS is stored, additional flags available when using the data importer (`tsbs_load_clickhouse`), 
and additional flags available for the query runner (`tsbs_run_queries_clickhouse`). 
**This should be read *after* the main README.**

## Data format

Data generated by `tsbs_generate_data` for ClickHouse is serialized in a "pseudo-CSV" format, 
along with a custom header at the beginning. The header is several lines long:
* one line composed of a comma-separated list of tag labels, with the literal string `tags` as the first value in the list
* one or more lines composed of a comma-separated list of field labels, with the hypertable name as the first value in the list
* a blank line

An example for the `cpu-only` use case:
```text
tags,hostname,region,datacenter,rack,os,arch,team,service,service_version,service_environment
cpu,usage_user,usage_system,usage_idle,usage_nice,usage_iowait,usage_irq,usage_softirq,usage_steal,usage_guest,usage_guest_nice
```

Following this, each reading is composed of two rows:
1. a comma-separated list of tag values for the reading, with the literal string `tags` as the first value in the list
1. a comma-separated list of field values for the reading, with the hypertable the reading belongs to being the first value and the timestamp as the second value

An example for the `cpu-only` use case:
```text
tags,host_0,eu-central-1,eu-central-1b,21,Ubuntu15.10,x86,SF,6,0,test
cpu,1451606400000000000,58.1317132304976170,2.6224297271376256,24.9969495069947882,61.5854484633778867,22.9481393231639395,63.6499207106198313,6.4098777048301052,44.8799140503027445,80.5028770761136201,38.2431182911542820
```

---

## `tsbs_load_clickhouse` Additional Flags


#### `-host` (type: `string`, default: `localhost`)

Hostname of the ClickHouse server.

#### `-user` (type: `string`, default: `default`)

User to use to connect to the ClickHouse server. Yes, default user is really called **default**

#### `-password` (type: `string`, default: ``)

Password to use to connect to the ClickHouse server. Default password is empty


### Miscellaneous

#### `-hash-workers` (type: `boolean`, default: `false`)
Whether to consistently hash data across the multiple insert workers by the
value of the primary (first) tag. For datasets with larger numbers of
devices, this option helps improve data locality on disk which can lead
to better query performance. For datasets with smaller numbers of devices, it is typically not necessary.

#### `-write-profile` (type: `string`, default: none)
File to output periodic CPU and memory statistics. Useful for understanding
system performance while writing data to the database.

---

## `tsbs_run_queries_clickhouse` Additional Flags

#### `-hosts` (type: `string`, default: `localhost`)

Comma separated list of hostnames for the ClickHouse servers.
Workers are connected to a server in a round-robin fashion.

#### `-additional-params` (type: `string`, default: `sslmode=disable`)

Specifies any connection parameters to pass along as the client
connects to the ClickHouse server. 

